[ENH] Expand contributing guidelines 🥳 (#172)
neurobagel/documentation: docs/contributing/CONTRIBUTING.md

# Contributing Guidelines

*We're so excited that you're interested in contributing to Neurobagel!* :partying_face:

We appreciate all contributions, and hope that the below guidelines will make it as easy as possible for you to contribute to the [Neurobagel codebase](https://github.com/neurobagel) and to ensure your contribution can be easily integrated.

> 

Reviewer: Want to add a short bit on "You will need to make a GH account" here. I know that's basic, but I like the idea of making this a really low first bar. 

c.f. the very well written tedana contribution doc: https://github.com/ME-ICA/tedana/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md

Author: Sure. I actually have seen that contribution template haha - was trying to strike a balance between avoiding having our version be too verbose (most people probably won't read) and setting the bar for contributing too high.

In this case, I think adding the tip about the GH account makes sense.

## Identifying an issue to work on

The easiest way to get started contributing is to explore the list of open issues in one of our [GitHub repositories](https://github.com/orgs/neurobagel/repositories). 

> For example, see the [open issues for the Neurobagel API](https://github.com/neurobagel/api/issues).

Reviewer: Maybe instead: look for "good first issue" labels?

Reviewer: agree. I mainly meant: keeping this generic across repos seems clearer to me. But :cherries:

> Regardless of if you would like to contribute a feature, bug fix, or another type of change, we recommend that you first either

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you are ready to contribute, the best way to join the conversation is by opening an issue to describe a change you would like to see or would like to contribute. Opening an issue before you start contributing code is important because it allows others in the project to discuss your idea and tell you where your contribution would be the most helpful.```

Something like that?

- **If an issue exists**: 
Comment on the open issue to indicate you would like to work on it, along with any clarification/implementation questions you have

>     - Check that no one is currently [assigned](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/assigning-issues-and-pull-requests-to-other-github-users) to the issue, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - If someone is already [assigned to the issue](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/assigning-issues-and-pull-requests-to-other-github-users) this means that the problem is actively being worked on and a solution will soon be proposed. Feel free to share some helpful resources or pointers that may be interesting to the person who is working the issue - and check back in a couple of days.
```

    which indicates it is already being worked on
- **If an issue does not exist**: 
Open a new issue describing your proposed change and why it is necessary/beneficial. 
The more detail here, the better!

This allows members of the Neurobagel developer team to confirm that you will not be overlapping with currently active work and that everyone is on the same page about the task to be accomplished.

> If you would like to contribute but are not sure where to start, we recommend looking for open issues with the following labels:

Reviewer: should we mention GH discussions as well? Do we have those enabled anywhere? Maybe one central discussion for very generic questions?

Reviewer: OK, I agree!

As an external contributor, the process you would follow to make your [proposed changes](#identifying-an-issue-to-work-on) should look something like this:

#### 1. [Fork](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/working-with-forks/fork-a-repo) the relevant Neurobagel repository to your profile.

#### 2. [Clone](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/working-with-forks/fork-a-repo#cloning-your-forked-repository) your fork of the Neurobagel repository to your local machine.

To keep up with changes in the Neurobagel repository while you work and avoid merge conflicts later on, make sure to:

- [Add the "upstream" Neurobagel repository as a remote](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/working-with-forks/fork-a-repo#configuring-git-to-sync-your-fork-with-the-upstream-repository) to your locally cloned repository
- [Keep your fork up to date](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/working-with-forks/syncing-a-fork#syncing-a-fork-branch-from-the-command-line) with the upstream repository

#### 3. Set up a development environment.

> Refer to the repository README for instructions on how to set up a development environment so you can test any local code changes you make.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the README of the neurobagel repository you are contributing to for instructions on how to set up a development environment so you can test any local code changes you make.
```

Note that the steps to set up a development environment (usually under a "Local installation", "Manual installation", or "Development environment" section) are generally different than those used to install the tool purely as a user, which usually appears at the top of the README.

For example, for the [Neurobagel CLI](https://github.com/neurobagel/bagel-cli):

- ["Development" mode installation steps](https://github.com/neurobagel/bagel-cli?tab=readme-ov-file#installation)
- [Normal (non-development mode) installation steps](https://github.com/neurobagel/bagel-cli?tab=readme-ov-file#development-environment)

> If you are working on a repository written in Python, we recommend that you also set up automatic code formatting and linting according to the project's code style, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most repositories use tools to do automatic code formatting and linting according to the project's code style, 
```

> which is pre-configured in the development environment for these repositories using [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which is pre-configured in the development environment for these repositories using [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/). Please make sure to set up these tools before you begin your work to ensure your contribution matches the existing code.
```

Run the following from the repository root of your local clone:
```bash
pre-commit install

> ```

Reviewer: it'd be `npx husky init` for the JS codebase. But that's in the README as well. @rmanaem wdyt: add that here as well or leave up to the repo?

Reviewer 2: I think it's better to leave it up to the repo.

Please consider using descriptive branch names. Some examples:

- `<username>/<issue-identifier>` (`jsmith/fix-1234`)
- `<username>/<brief-change-title>` (`jsmith/add-logging`, `jsmith/enh/add-logging`)

Once you are satisfied with your local changes, [add, commit, and push](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-files/adding-a-file-to-a-repository#adding-a-file-to-a-repository-using-the-command-line) them to your branch on your forked repository on GitHub. 

#### 5. [Open a pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request-from-a-fork)
See the below sections for information on [how to submit your pull request](#pull-request-guidelines) and [what to expect in a pull request review](#pull-request-reviews).

## Pull request guidelines

When you first open a pull request, you should automatically see a template in the pull request body that looks something like [this](https://github.com/neurobagel/.github/blob/main/.github/pull_request_template.md?plain=1) that you can fill out.

> The template is designed to make it easier for maintainers to review your pull request, but feel free to add any additional information that you feel is useful or necessary.

Reviewer 2: I think it's a good idea to mention "The checks in the template should remain intact as they're for the maintainer to go over during review."

Author: Wdyt about making this more visible in the PR template itself? I'm hoping to avoid having duplication of info where possible, in case we change how we use the PR template in the future.

As part of https://github.com/neurobagel/.github/issues/9, I'm thinking to add a non-commented note to our [checklist](https://github.com/neurobagel/.github/blob/main/.github/pull_request_template.md#checklist) reminding PR authors to leave the checkboxes for the PR reviewer.

Reviewer 2: Good call.

Pull request titles should begin with a descriptive prefix (e.g., "[ENH] Implement check for presence of a session ID column"):

- `[ENH]:` Feature improvements or additions
- `[REF]:` Refactoring existing code
- `[TST]`: Updating or adding a test
- `[CI]`: Automation-related changes
- `[MNT]`: General maintenance not covered by `[REF]`, `[TST]`, or `[CI]`
- `[INF]`: Software or graph infrastructure-related changes
- `[FIX]`: Bug fixes
- `[MODEL]`: Updates or changes related to the Neurobagel data model
- `[DOC]`: Documentation-only changes to a code repo (READMEs, within-code documentation, etc.) 
    - Exception: changes to the [`documentation`](https://github.com/neurobagel/documentation) repo should use one of the below PR prefixes instead of `[DOC]`

If you are an external contributor, once your pull request is opened,

> we recommend that you [request a review](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/requesting-a-pull-request-review) from a [Neurobagel core maintainer](http://127.0.0.1:8000/contributing/team/#developers) to ensure it gets reviewed in a timely manner.

Reviewer: localhost seems to sneak into your links sometimes. copy/paste problem maybe?

Author: > localhost seems to sneak into your links sometimes. copy/paste problem maybe?

Heh, yep. I sometimes fill URLs in at the end, maybe too speedily. Looks like I missed the markdown link check here - will make sure to double check next time.

> more generally: do we want that? i.e. people requesting review directly? We should maybe add a bot to label and move the PR to the board. But it'd be tricky for external folks to know who to add here the page you linked includes many folks - and they may also be busy.

Yeah, good point. I'm okay with removing that recommendation for now until we have a better process. Sounds good?

Reviewer 2: > more generally: do we want that? i.e. people requesting review directly? We should maybe add a bot to label and move the PR to the board. But it'd be tricky for external folks to know who to add here the page you linked includes many folks - and they may also be busy.

I second this.
We could use the `_community` label for now and update its description to not be a `BOT ONLY` or add another label for bot PRs.

Author: That solution sounds good @neurobagel/dev.

I'll separate the labelling business into a separate issue, and remove the recommendation for requesting a review for now. We can update this page once the labels are updated.

Author: See:
- https://github.com/orgs/neurobagel/projects/1/views/34?pane=issue&itemId=39843347

### Pull requests to the [`documentation`](https://github.com/neurobagel/documentation) repo
In PRs to the [Neurobagel documentation](https://github.com/neurobagel/documentation), using the `[DOC]` title prefix is discouraged as it is too broad. 
Instead, for documentation content changes, the following prefixes can be used to specify the nature of the change:

- `[ENH]`: Updating or adding new documentation
- `[REF]`: Simplifying or restructuring documentation (i.e., pages, sections, paragraphs)
- `[FIX]`: Fixing errors in the documentation

## Pull request reviews

> A core maintainer will review each PR and may provide comments or suggestions for the PR author to address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A maintainer will review each PR and may provide comments or suggestions for the PR author to address.
```

Neurobagel PR reviews may use the following emoji signifiers:

:cook:: Ready to merge or approved without suggestions

:cherries:: Some optional/suggested changes that could be nice to have but are not required to merge

If (required) changes are requested, the PR author should re-request a review from the reviewer once the comments have been addressed.

### When your pull request is approved
If you **are not a member of the Neurobagel developer team**: the reviewing Neurobagel maintainer is responsible for merging the PR.

> If you **are a member of the Neurobagel developer team** (i.e., you have write access to the repository): the PR author is responsible for merging the PR.

Reviewer: I know that's how we explain it so far, but what about just saying: "if you have write permission" vs "if you don't" instead? It's more accurate, and it sounds a little less like a big deal.

## Have a question about contributing?
At any point during a contribution, 

> please do not hesitate to [mention](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax#mentioning-people-and-teams) one of the core maintainers if you have a question or need further guidance, 

Reviewer 2: I think it's a good idea to link the team page on at least of the `core maintainers`.
